---
source_system: "cloudability-premium"
practice: "finops"
language: "en"
doc_type: "product"
title: "Optimization Dashboard"
breadcrumb:
  - "Cloudability Premium"
  - "Optimize"
source_path: "product/optimization_dashboard.html"
images: []
capability_ids: []
last_updated: "2026-06-29"
summary: ""
---
# Optimization Dashboard

## Optimization Hub

The Optimization Dashboard provides a centralized view of all optimization-related initiative and
insights. This optimization command center provides both

- A forward-looking view into opportunities to drive savings across Commitments and Rightsizing
- A backwards looking view into impact of these initiatives and the savings that have been
  accomplished via Commitments and Rightsizing

## Opportunities

The opportunities page shows both opportunities for both Resource Optimization (based on
Cloudability’s Rightsizing Recommendations) and Commitments (based on Cloudability’s commitment
recommendation).

## Resource Optimization Opportunities

Resource optimization surface summary information from your rightsizing recommendations, subject
to the Preferences selections made for in the Rightsizing Preferences: Dashboard page.

The Resource optimization provides high level visibility into total opportunities and provides
links to access more information from the rightsizing recommendations in Cloudability.

Along with the opportunities themselves, the Optimization dashboard provides a COIN score to
contextualize those opportunities.

**COIN Score:** COIN (or Cost Optimization Index Number) is a method of providing context
around an optimization opportunity.

Calculated as **COIN = 100\*(1 – (Optimization Opportunity/Spend))**, so a COIN of 100 would
imply spend that has no opportunity available.

Where:

- **Optimization Opportunity:** Is the sum of rightsizing savings available, subject to the
  selected preferences, view, and filters applied.

- **Spend:** refers to the relevant and optimizable spend as measured by the relevant Cost
  Metric based on your preference selection. When the On Demand Cost basis is selected in the
  preference page, the COIN score will be calculated using spemnd as measure in Cost (List). When the
  Effective Cost Basis is selected, the COIN score will be calculated using Cost (Adjusted Amortized)
  or Cost (Amortized) depending on availability of the metrics. When Adjusted Amortized spend is not
  available, the calculation uses the Cost (Amortized) metric.

COIN, as calculated in this dashboard, is limited to the services supported in Cloudability’s
rightsizing engine, so spend on services not supported in Cloudability’s rightsizing engine is not
included in the COIN calculation.

**Preferences**

The workload optimization recommendations that are displayed as part of the Optimization
Dashboard can be controlled via preferences. The preferences page (found
under *Settings>Rightsizing Preferences>Dashboard*) provides the following options and apply at
an organization wide level.

**Effective vs On Demand Cost Basis** – The desired cost basis for the recommendation set
shown. While not every recommendation type has a “Effective” cost basis, when the effective cost
basis is selected: The effective cost basis will be shown where relevant and the on-demand cost
basis will be provided to still provide a full picture of your optimization opportunities.

This selection also impacts the cost that are used to contextualize the opportunities in your
COIN calculations. When the On Demand Cost basis is selected, the COIN score will be calculated
using Cost (List). When the Effective Cost Basis is selected, the COIN score will be calculated
using Cost (Adjusted Amortized) or Cost (Amortized) depending on availability of the metrics.

**Advanced vs Basic Recommendations –**This setting is only available to Cloudability Premium
customers and allows organizations to choose if they would like the dashboard to be populated by the
Rightsizing recommendations generated by Cloudability (visible under the “Basic” tab on the
rightsizing page) or the recommendations generated by Turbonomic’s powerful rightsizing engine
(visible under the “Advanced” tab)

**Basic Recommendations Preferences** – This section allows organization to further tailor the
basic recommendation set when the above option is selected. Advanced recommendations can be refined
via policies instead of these dashboard level preferences.

- **10 vs 30 day look back period – Users can select if they would like to see recommendations
  based on resource utilization over the last 10 days or the last 30 days**
- **Include snoozed recommendations –**organizations can opt to see the full picture of
  opportunities (including those they have chosen to “snooze” and may not be actionable in the short
  term) or to focus on the more actionable opportunities by excluding snoozed recommendations.
- **Tag Keys or Business Dimensions** - are present in the “slice by” drop downs on each widget.

## Commitment Opportunities

The commitment opportunity section provides an overview of the available savings through
commitment-based discounts.

Note: Commitment opportunities default to 3 year commitments and the associated discounts at this
time.

Like resource optimization, a COIN score based on rate optimization is available as well.

## Realized Savings

Realized savings shows the impact of cost savings activities, across both resource and
rightsizing activities.

A selectable date range at the top of the realized savings page allows users to customize the
date range.

- For realized resource savings, the selected date range filters for the actioned date (when
  Cloudability detects a change in the resource configuration) so only the impact of actions
- For realized commitment savings, the selected date range provides a reporting window for savings
  achieved during that range. Because different providers provide different levels of data:
- For AWS and Azure commitment savings: The realized savings for the selected range is calculated
  based on the difference between what you would have paid ( the on demand equivalent cost of resource
  usage) minus what you actually paid (Cost (adjusted amortized) which includes commitments).
- For GCP Commitment Savings: Savings is reported from the Commitment Portfolio.

In addition to date, the Realized savings pages can be filtered by service, account, account
group, or region.

**Resource**

Realized Resources savings is built on top of the Rightsizing ROI functionality, surfacing the
impact of the recommendations and actions tracked in rightsizing ROI.

**Commitment**

Commitment realized savings surfaces summary information related to the savings accomplished by
comparing the actual cost of the usage based on commitment coverage and discounts relative to On
Demand pricing

## COIN Explorer

The third tab on the Optimization Dashboard provides a dynamic reporting experience for COIN
Score at the desired granularity. Users can select the desired fields including Tags or Business
Mappings to view and compare their COIN scores

The COIN calculation and used metrics are described above and consistent between the opportunity
tab and the explorer tab.

COIN Explorer allows users to dynamically select lookback period or cost basis (overriding the
preferences page) and respects the preference selected for including or excluding snoozed
recommendations or recommendation source (where relevant).

## Additional Topics

**Permissions**

The Optimization dashboard does not have independent permissions associated with it. The insights
in this feature set are built on top of functionality spanning Rightsizing, Rightsizing ROI, and
Commitments along with the underlying cost data. To effectively utilize this functionality, you need
the permissions associated with those underlying features.

**How Views Work**

Views will work in different ways with different parts of the Optimization dashboard based on how
views work with the underlying data.

For example, Views based on business dimensions can be used with the Optimization dashboard, but
because these views are not supported in the commitment recommendations or portfolio pages, aspects
of both the commitment opportunities and realized savings pages will not be populated.

**Exporting Data**

The data in the optimization dashboard can be pulled directly from the source APIs (E.g., the
rightsizing, commitments, or cost end points) but APIs are not available for pre-calculated COIN
score.

COIN Explorer data can be exported to csv at the desired granularity on the COIN explorer page.
